title: Liberman et al. (1957) Continuum  
slug: liberman1957-continuum  
authors: Alvin M. Liberman, Katherine S. Harris, Howard S. Hoffman, Belver C. Griffith  
date: 1957  
source: http://www.haskins.yale.edu/featured/bdg.php?audio=AIFF#  
type: audio stimuli  
languages: english  
tags: categorical-perception, formants, pattern-playback, continuum, place, plosive, english  
open_access: yes  
publications: Liberman et al. (1957)  
citation: Liberman, A. M., Harris, K. S., Hoffman, H. S., & Griffith, B. C. (1957). The discrimination of speech sounds within and across phoneme boundaries. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 54(5), 358-368.  
shortdesc: Synthetic speech stimuli generated by the Pattern Playback for use in the demonstration of categorical perception of plosive place of articulation in Liberman et al. (1957).  
summary: Audio files are provided for a consonant-vowel syllable continuum that starts with the sound "bae", moves through "dae" and ends up at "gae". These syllables were produced using the Pattern Playback by hand-painting each of the carefully controlled formant patterns. In this continuum, the lower band of energy (the first formant) is the same for each syllable. The only thing that is changing is the second formant transition. The continuum consists of 13 items. The onset of the second formant transition is varied in equal frequency steps. The Pattern Playback provided an experimental tool that for the first time let researchers systematically control the important acoustic information in speech signals. In turn, these researchers could then also evaluate the perceptual consequences of these careful acoustic manipulations. In the example presented here we can see the importance of the second formant transition in determining the consonant identity.  
<!--
license: 
documentation:
tests:
coverage:
reviews:
-->
